---
title: "codebook"
author: "Erica Trinh"
date: "August 28, 2017"
output: html_document
---
##Running the script
The script was written to run with no arguments. The script directly takes the files from the directory and processes them to create the tidy table.

## Data Processing
The raw data from the testing and training phase were merged together into one data set. The table was given appropiate labels. Only columns with the means and standard deviation of measurements were extracted. A tidy table with the average of each column was then generated by subject and their activity.

##Description of the variables 
Dimension of Tidy Table: 180 row x 81 col
Units: Time[s], Frequency[Hz] 
Variables:
 [1] "subjectID"                         
 [2] "activitylabel"                     
 [3] "avgTimeBodyAccMeanX"               
 [4] "avgTimeBodyAccMeanY"               
 [5] "avgTimeBodyAccMeanZ"               
 [6] "avgTimeBodyAccStdX"                
 [7] "avgTimeBodyAccStdY"                
 [8] "avgTimeBodyAccStdZ"                
 [9] "avgTimeGravityAccMeanX"            
[10] "avgTimeGravityAccMeanY"            
[11] "avgTimeGravityAccMeanZ"            
[12] "avgTimeGravityAccStdX"             
[13] "avgTimeGravityAccStdY"             
[14] "avgTimeGravityAccStdZ"             
[15] "avgTimeBodyAccJerkMeanX"           
[16] "avgTimeBodyAccJerkMeanY"           
[17] "avgTimeBodyAccJerkMeanZ"           
[18] "avgTimeBodyAccJerkStdX"            
[19] "avgTimeBodyAccJerkStdY"            
[20] "avgTimeBodyAccJerkStdZ"            
[21] "avgTimeBodyGyroMeanX"              
[22] "avgTimeBodyGyroMeanY"              
[23] "avgTimeBodyGyroMeanZ"              
[24] "avgTimeBodyGyroStdX"               
[25] "avgTimeBodyGyroStdY"               
[26] "avgTimeBodyGyroStdZ"               
[27] "avgTimeBodyGyroJerkMeanX"          
[28] "avgTimeBodyGyroJerkMeanY"          
[29] "avgTimeBodyGyroJerkMeanZ"          
[30] "avgTimeBodyGyroJerkStdX"           
[31] "avgTimeBodyGyroJerkStdY"           
[32] "avgTimeBodyGyroJerkStdZ"           
[33] "avgTimeBodyAccMagMean"             
[34] "avgTimeBodyAccMagStd"              
[35] "avgTimeGravityAccMagMean"          
[36] "avgTimeGravityAccMagStd"           
[37] "avgTimeBodyAccJerkMagMean"         
[38] "avgTimeBodyAccJerkMagStd"          
[39] "avgTimeBodyGyroMagMean"            
[40] "avgTimeBodyGyroMagStd"             
[41] "avgTimeBodyGyroJerkMagMean"        
[42] "avgTimeBodyGyroJerkMagStd"         
[43] "avgFreqBodyAccMeanX"               
[44] "avgFreqBodyAccMeanY"               
[45] "avgFreqBodyAccMeanZ"               
[46] "avgFreqBodyAccStdX"                
[47] "avgFreqBodyAccStdY"                
[48] "avgFreqBodyAccStdZ"                
[49] "avgFreqBodyAccMeanFreqX"           
[50] "avgFreqBodyAccMeanFreqY"           
[51] "avgFreqBodyAccMeanFreqZ"           
[52] "avgFreqBodyAccJerkMeanX"           
[53] "avgFreqBodyAccJerkMeanY"           
[54] "avgFreqBodyAccJerkMeanZ"           
[55] "avgFreqBodyAccJerkStdX"            
[56] "avgFreqBodyAccJerkStdY"            
[57] "avgFreqBodyAccJerkStdZ"            
[58] "avgFreqBodyAccJerkMeanFreqX"       
[59] "avgFreqBodyAccJerkMeanFreqY"       
[60] "avgFreqBodyAccJerkMeanFreqZ"       
[61] "avgFreqBodyGyroMeanX"              
[62] "avgFreqBodyGyroMeanY"              
[63] "avgFreqBodyGyroMeanZ"              
[64] "avgFreqBodyGyroStdX"               
[65] "avgFreqBodyGyroStdY"               
[66] "avgFreqBodyGyroStdZ"               
[67] "avgFreqBodyGyroMeanFreqX"          
[68] "avgFreqBodyGyroMeanFreqY"          
[69] "avgFreqBodyGyroMeanFreqZ"          
[70] "avgFreqBodyAccMagMean"             
[71] "avgFreqBodyAccMagStd"              
[72] "avgFreqBodyAccMagMeanFreq"         
[73] "avgFreqBodyBodyAccJerkMagMean"     
[74] "avgFreqBodyBodyAccJerkMagStd"      
[75] "avgFreqBodyBodyAccJerkMagMeanFreq" 
[76] "avgFreqBodyBodyGyroMagMean"        
[77] "avgFreqBodyBodyGyroMagStd"         
[78] "avgFreqBodyBodyGyroMagMeanFreq"    
[79] "avgFreqBodyBodyGyroJerkMagMean"    
[80] "avgFreqBodyBodyGyroJerkMagStd"     
[81] "avgFreqBodyBodyGyroJerkMagMeanFreq"

##Collection of raw data
The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain. 

##Measurement
The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

License:
========
Use of this dataset in publications must be acknowledged by referencing the following publication [1] 

[1] Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. Dec 2012

This dataset is distributed AS-IS and no responsibility implied or explicit can be addressed to the authors or their institutions for its use or misuse. Any commercial use is prohibited.

Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz, Alessandro Ghio, Luca Oneto, Davide Anguita. November 2012.

